Benefits Of Vaccination

Vaccines provide an active acquired immunity which helps protect the body against diseases that the body cannot fight naturally. Vaccines are impeccable for children since their immune systems are not developed fully. The vaccines provide protection from multiple diseases and infections that their body cannot fight. Vaccines reduce the risk of infection while ensuring limited effect on the overall growth of a child.

Vaccines have several benefits for the child. Firstly, vaccines save the life of a child by protecting them against multiple diseases. Some of the diseases that used to pose a threat to the lives of children have been eradicated through the use of vaccines. Secondly, vaccines are safe and effective to administer to children.

Vaccines are often administered to children after careful evaluation of their medical records by healthcare professionals. Vaccines can cause pain, discomfort or trauma due to antibody antigen reaction but these pain, trauma and discomfort is less compared to the pain experienced by the diseases the vaccines prevent. In addition, adverse allergic reactions are rare when administering vaccines. The federal government provides funding for the Vaccines for Children program which helps provide free vaccine for children coming from low income families .

Lastly, vaccines help protect future generations. It should be noted that some individuals might be allergic to specific components that are used in the manufacture of vaccines. Thimerosal is a mercury based preservative that prevents contamination of vaccines and does not cause autism . In addition, most childhood vaccines do not contain thimerosal except for certain flu vaccines.

Thimerosal was removed from the production of childhood vaccines in an effort to reduce the level of mercury exposure among children. There are also alternative vaccines for flu vaccines that contain thimerosal. Vaccines can prevent the agony and trauma of living with disability. Childhood vaccines cannot cause autism.
